Line 110:  "He groaned and, *lifting both palms to heaven*, said:"

This is showing how the Romans would pray, which to the Catholic, looks like the *orans* position that the priest assumes during the Mass. This has persisted in our liturgies for 2000 years and is an example of how we are not just Catholics, but Roman Catholics. When the early Christians were working out the official liturgy, many of the liturgical elements came from Roman methods of worship. This includes the *orans* position, the method we start the sign of the cross and the architecture of our churches. To begin the sign of the cross, we raise our hand, palm up to our forehead, with all five fingers extended. This is how Roman soldiers would make a salute which brings a whole new meaning to making this sign when starting to pray. We are taking our marching orders from Our Lord, Christ, King of the Universe. Studying the ancient Romans, and seeing how their practices bled through to early Christianity and how the early Christians would have interpreted the Miracles Christ helps me enter in to the depth of our faith.  When you look at the current state of our liturgy and worship practices, there is a lot of beauty there but there exists a whole other world of depth and beauty and nuance when you begin to understand the significance to even the smallest details that we often overlook. 

Another example of this is in [[Aeneid 2]] when Ascanius' head is covered in "holy fire" which is very similar to the descent of the Holy Spirit during Pentecost

Something that Prof. Callahan mention in lecture the first week of class was along the lines of, "God needed the Greeks and Romans to be Greek and to be Roman so that the rest of the world would be prepared for the coming of His Son".  This has been something that keeps coming up the more I read from the Aeneid as each chapter includes at least a small passage that reminds me of an element of my faith or that would have affected the faith of the early Christians. It also helped to give everyone in the general Mediterranean area a baseline for the characters and themes in Christianity. They had a concept of a God the Father, in Zeus / Jupiter, a motherly figure in Minerva / Athena and a firm belief in a supernatural world that bled into every aspect of their lives.  The earliest evangelists just had to baptize these beliefs to point them to the right place. 

This is evident in Italy, there were several temples that used to be dedicated to Minerva that are now Catholic churches dedicated to Our Lady and former temples to Jupiter that are now dedicated to God the Father. During the Rome trip last spring, we visited several of the Minervan temples, one in Assisi, one in Florence and one in Rome. We also visited a former Jupiter temple in Rome, on the Capitoline hill.